Let us continue to look at DAGs and in this
section we will look at a different problem
called identifying the Longest Path in a DAG.
So, recall that a directed acyclic graph is
just a directed graph in which there is no
directed path from any vertex back to itself,
so it is direct and it is acyclic.
Any directed acyclic graph can be topologically
ordered. If you think of the vertices as being
1 to n, you can write out 1 to n as a sequence
in such a way that for every pair j, k which
is an edge if j, k is an edge in my graph,
then j will appear before k in the sequence.
So, if you think of these as tasks with dependencies
means that I can do the task in such a way
that before I do k, I would have finished
its dependence task j. So, this is called
a topological sorting.
So, let us look at a different question about
DAGs. So, supposing we have this DAG and we
imagine that the vertices represent courses
and the edges are prerequisites. Now, these
are courses that we have to do to may be complete
the degree, every course requires a semester,
but we can do more than one course in a semester.
So, the question is, what is the minimum number
of semesters that I need to complete this
program consisting of these 8 courses, with
these prerequisites.
So, clearly I can start putting courses 1
and 2 in the first semester, because they
have no prerequisites, so they can be done
immediately. Now, having done 1 and 2 I can
do 3, because 3 has only depends on 1 and
2. Similarly, I can do 4 and 5 because they
depend only on 1, now 8 depends on 1 and 2
I need the material or at least depends on
2. I need to have done, 2 to do 8, but I still
cannot do 8, because it also requires 5, 4
and 7. So, at this point the only courses
which are available are 3, 4 and 5. So, in
my second semester I can do 3, 4 and 5.
Now, the only course for which all prerequisites
are satisfied is 6, 7 requires 6 which has
not been done and 8 requires 7 which has not
been done. So, in the third semester I am
struck with doing only one course namely 6.
In the 4th semester, I can do 7 and finally,
after 5 semesters I can complete these requirements.
So, in general we can ask this question, if
I think of these as DAG as representing courses,
what is the minimum number of semesters.
Now, this problem corresponds to asking for
the longest path in the DAG. What we are saying
is that it takes 5 semesters to complete 8,
because there is a chain of dependencies,
where 8 depends on 7, 7 depends on 6, 6 depends
on say 3 or 4 it does not matter which one
we choose and 3 depends on 1 and this chain
forces us to spend 4 semesters, because it
is a chain of length 4, 4 semesters before
I can do 8. Notice that it is not the shortest
chain, because there are shorter chains for
example, 8 to 2 takes back to a vertex which
has indegree 0, but this does not help us
because after 2 I cannot do 8. So, I must
wait for everything that has to happen before
8 in order to get the job done. So, unlike
other problems where we might be looking at
shortest paths, here we are actually interested
in the longest path.
So, we can set up this problem as follows,
so we can say that for any vertex which has
indegree 0, the longest path to that vertex
is of length 0, because I can do it immediately.
And on the other hand, if I have a vertex
whose indegree is not 0, then it has some
incoming edges. So, I have a vertex k, so
I must wait for all of these to finish and
then do it. So, if I take all of these I have
to take, among all of these I have to take
the maximum length, because that will be the
last thing to finish and after that I have
to do plus 1 account for k. So, if indegree
is not 0 then the longest path to k has length
1 plus the maximum of the longest path to
all its incoming neighbours.
So, therefore in order to compute the longest
path to k, I need to compute the longest path
to all its incoming neighbours. Now, if we
have arranged the vertices in topological
order and we compute the longest path in that
sequence, then when we get to k every incoming
neighbour j will be on its left. Hence, we
would already computed its longest path, so
we would be able to take the maximum number
of all of those and add 1.
So, by sorting these vertices in topological
order, I can then compute the longest path
in the same order with the guarantee that
when I want to compute the longest path to
a given vertex, I have all the information
available need to do that namely all the longest
paths for its incoming neighbours.
So, if I do it naively then I will write out
my vertices in some topological order and
now when I come to this vertex and I want
to compute its longest path, I will look at
in my graph all the incoming edges and they
will all be from vertices which appear before.
So, I can take the value here, the value here,
the value here and then take the maximum and
then add 1. So, actually we will see that
you do not need to do this backward, you can
actually do it forward.
So, we can actually incrementally compute
the value at i k as you are going forwards.
Because, going backwards requires you to scan
this list and look for all the incoming neighbours.
So, we will kind of implicitly do this longest
path calculation along with topological sort
side by side, as we will see in the next example.
So, here is an example in which we are going
to compute the longest path as we are computing
the topological order. So, as before the red
numbers against the vertices are used for
topological sort and they denote the indegrees.
So, the initial indegrees are given by the
initial edges in our graph and what we do
is we compute the longest path incrementally
by starting by assuming that the longest path
to every vertex is actually 0.
Now, when we enumerate a vertex in topological
sort what we did earlier was to update the
indegrees, so this is something that we already
did. But, now the additional thing that we
do is we say that well if the vertex 1 had
to be enumerated before 3, 4 and 5, then among
the values that I know for the incoming edges
of 3, 4 and 5, 0 was the maximum in length.
So, I must do 1 plus that, so these paths
are at least of length 1. So, the longest
path to 3, 4 and 5 is at least 1.
Now, if I enumerate vertex 4, then its longest
path is at least 1, so therefore, the longest
path to 6 must be at least 1 plus 1. Similarly,
the longest path to 8 must be at least 1 plus
1 and of course, the indegrees will also reduce
as before. So, the indegree of 6 goes on to
1, the indegree of 8 goes on to 3, but the
longest path to 6 is now the longest path
to 4 plus 1, so it is 2, it is same for 8.
Now, supposing I enumerate the vertex 2, now
2 will again say that the longest path, because
of 2 the longest path to 3 is 1, but it is
already 1, so we do not change it.
This will say because of 2 the longest path
to 8 is at least 1, but we know it is at least
2, so again we do not change. So, when we
delete a node, then we take basically the
current value of the longest path for its
outgoing thing plus 1, the current value of
the deleted node plus 1 and what is already
known about that node and we keep the maximum.
So, in this case this 1 will become 0, this
3 will become 2, but here there is no change
and here there is no change.
Now likewise when I remove this 5, this 2
will become 1, but because 1 plus 1 is 2 and
we already know that 8 has a longest path
of at least 2, we do not make any change in
the 2.
Now, when we go to 3, 3 says it has a longest
path of 1, so therefore because of 3 the longest
path of 6 at least 2, but we already know
it is 2, so again there is no change.
Now, we shall do something interesting, so
we say that 6 has a longest path of 2, 7 we
so far have believed it has longest path of
0, but through 6 it has a longer path. So,
the path to 7 must now be updated from 0 to
3.
And now because of this, when we go from 7
to 8, the longest path for 8 must be updated
from 2 to 4.
And now finally, this is my last vertex, so
I just enumerate it and I compute its longest
path as 4.
So, what this has said is the longest path
is 4, now we said that it will be done in
5 semesters, this same example which basically
means that in the first semester all those
whose longest path is 0, in the second semester
all those whose longest path is 1 and so we
have the same sequence you had before. So,
we initially do 1 and 2 in the first semester,
then we do 3, 4 and 5 in the second semester,
then we do 6 in the third semester, 7 in the
fourth semester and 8 in the fifth semester.
So, this is the exactly the solution that
we obtained informally on our initial example.
So, the pseudo code for longest path as we
saw is very similar to what we did for the
topological sort, we just have keep track
of this extra longest path value. So, when
we initialize the indegree we also initialize
the longest path to i to be 0 for every vertex.
So, this we are doing again for the adjacency
matrix version. So, we do n squared work for
each vertex, we compute the indegree by looking
at the column of the adjacency matrix with
entry, column entry i.
But, we also update, we initialize longest
path to each i as 0, now when we are doing
this enumeration as before we choose any vertex
with indegree 0, we enumerate it and we update
the indegree of this vertex to minus 1. So,
it is no long were in contention for being
chosen again. Now, for all its out going neighbours,
we update the indegree and we also update
the longest path.
So, we take the longest path that we already
know to that neighbour, the LPT of k and we
take 1 plus the longest path for this node
and whichever is larger we replace that back
in LPT of k. So, it is a very simple variation
of the basic topological ordering thing which
allows us also to compute the longest path.
So, this has complexity order n squared for
the same reason that we had found that topological
short with adjacency matrix is order n squared.
Because, we have these nested loops in order
to scan all the neighbours, so as before we
can update this whole thing using adjacency
list and a queue to make it a linear then
algorithm.
So, if you go back and look at the topological
ordering algorithm, you will find that the
same changes are required to make a... additional
compute the longest path. So, what we do is
initializing is again the same we do it for
every vertex. So, this is an order n step,
we initialize both the indegree and the longest
path. Then we go through all the adjacency
lists and together this is an order m step
to compute the initial indegrees.
And now we have an order n step in order to
setup this queue, where we will process the
topological ordering. And then, we do an outer
loop of order n, so this is an order n loop,
because everything is going to go into the
queue once and come out. So, we are going
to remove from the queue n times and now because
we are scanning the list across all the n
iterations we are going to process each edge
once. So, the total work done in this loop
is going to be order n.
So, we do exactly as before we update the
indegree, we update the longest path to k
as maximum of the current value and 1 plus
the value of the current node and if we do
find that the k has now become a vertex with
indegree 0 we added to the queue.
So, DAGs are very useful because there many
situations, where we want to model dependencies
between various objects. And topological ordering
is a canonical algorithm to list out vertices
without violating dependencies, what we are
seen today is that, we can compute the longest
path in a DAG and longest path in a DAG in
some sense if we can list out vertices in
groups, longest path in a DAG represents the
minimum number of steps in order to enumerate
all the vertices.
So, if we going to do courses in groups, then
if you want to bunch it and do things which
are at the same level at one time, then the
minimum number of steps we need, minimum of
semesters to complete set of courses or the
minimum number of days to complete a set of
tasks is given by the longest path. Now, it
is important that we have been able to find
an efficient linear time algorithm for longest
path only because we restricted our attention
to DAGs.
If we look at arbitrary graphs which are not
necessarily DAGs and we want to find longest
paths of course, if we have loops there the
longest path will be undefined, because the
can go round and round the loop. So, if we
define a longest path to be one in which we
have a sequence of vertices with no duplicates.
So, the length is at most n, then in an arbitrary
graph this is a very challenging problem and
there is no known efficient algorithm. In
fact, it is part of a group of highly intractable
problems which are all equivalent to each
other and all are believed to be very hard.
So, DAGs are a very significant subclass of
graphs which have many practical applications
and which admit efficient solutions for very
important problems, which are not in general
solvable easily and on the full class of graphs.